compare yourself to who you were
yesterday not to who someone else is
today you know if you get the comparison
right you can say well here's where I'm
headed and it's worth going to you have
to ask yourself that is there a place I
could head to that would be worth
getting to and that's a question right
it's a question like you might ask your
wife it's like okay if I could give you
what you wanted it's a good thing to ask
during an argument by the way really
really it has to be an honest question
it's like you're arguing with me I I
don't know who's right neither of us cuz
we're both clueless and confused it's
like if you could have what you wanted
in this moment and I could deliver it
what would it be the general answer to
that is something like if you loved me
you'd know which is not a
helpful how come you know that answer
it's not a helpful answer it's like no
I'm I'm too stupid to know what you want
that's for sure you don't even know what
you want so how in the world am I going
to figure out but it's a lovely gift to
offer your partner by the way the
conditions for your
satisfaction but then you have to allow
yourself to know what they are and you
have to be acting in your own best
interest and then that exposes you to
all these potential calamities that we
just described and uh that's a big risk
but it's not nearly as big a risk as
never getting what you want and need and
that is definitely the alternative and
that's a pathway to bitterness and
cynicism and a wasted life and and
bitterness and cic ISM that's just where
that starts it gets way worse as it
compounds and
so it's very useful to treat
yourself like you're someone you're
responsible for helping and it is very
useful to compare yourself to who you
were yesterday not to who someone else
is today there's
no way of interacting with someone
including yourself that's more
productive than to give targeted reward
where credit is due to give credit where
credit is due and you might say well how
can I treat myself well given that I'm
nothing but a the embodiment of
serpentine uh what would you call it
errors and sins and the answer is well
if you're a little better than you were
previously that's
something really and maybe that's what
you want to see in your kids right I
mean you don't want to push them too far
you you don't want to pun them if they
haven't made huge leaps forward
developmentally what you want to see is
incremental progress that requires some
effort and that's actually what your
kids really love too you know if they're
playing hard they're they're on the edge
they're pushing themselves to develop
their skills maybe they're playing a
sport they're pushing themselves to move
incrementally at the optimum rate that's
another thing that play indicates by the
way that's and that's so cool to know
too play signals that you're pushing
yourself forward at the optimal rate cuz
you can't stay static and you can't
absorb too much change at once how do
you know when it's right well it's
engaging it's meaningful but at the
highest level it's something like play
you know when kids when you're when
you're playing a sport you want to play
against someone who's approximately the
same level of skill as you or maybe a
little Beyond right if you're playing a
game with someone who's approximately
your equal and you're pushing each other
exactly enough to facilitate optimal
movement forward and that's actually a
very good
conceptual scheme for apprehending the
nature of a marriage so I found out from
Ben Shapiro interestingly enough that
there's a there's a there's a
translation in the King James Bible um
of of God's description of Eve before he
makes her says uh the King James version
says that God says he's going to make
Adam a help meat and that's a archaic
word right no no you don't call your
wife your help meat generally or you're
going to get a probably if you do but my
point is it's an archaic term the the
biblical language means something like
beneficial
adversary and that's very nice you know
it's it's very nice because a beneficial
adversary would be someone that you're
pushing against and that's pushing
against you exactly the right amount and
there's this phenomena phenomenon that's
known neurologically called opponent
processing and a lot of the
manners in which we make difficult and
calibrated decisions neurologically
involves two systems working in counter
position to one another so imagine I
want to move my hand smoothly as
smoothly as possible that's pretty
smooth but I'm shaking a little bit and
it's a bit jerky so I'm using
voluntary systems to move my hand and
they're a little imprecise if I want to
move it perfectly I go like this
and then I can calibrate it unbelievably
precisely and that that dance that you
have with your partner that's what
that's supposed to be optimized opponent
processing so imagine why it's it's like
it's the same as free speech in some
real sense it's a manifestation of the
logos that optimized adversarial process
why well think about it this way imagine
you have a child and uh or you have
three children they're all quite
different cuz children tend to be quite
different even if they're born in the
same family and so then you might ask
yourself well how should we treat our
children and the answer is
well they're different so is there a
rule and there are some guidelines and
principles I had one in my book don't
don't let your children do anything that
makes you dislike them that's a good
rule to turn
to how do you know if you're not being a
tyrant you know your children act up and
they annoy you maybe you're just
mean or maybe they never annoy you but
they annoy everyone else in which case
you're not mean
enough and I mean that definitely
because if your children never annoy
you but they annoy everyone
else then they won't have any
friends and then they're in real
trouble but your children are different
so how do you know how to calibrate your
response to them and then answer is well
you push back and forth against your
wife or your husband and you you know
maybe want to use a bit more encouraging
and one of use a bit more Sheltering
that's often the masculine versus
feminine roles Al although that can
intermingle you know but generally those
are associated with Justice in some
sense and encouragement with masculinity
and mercy and tenderness with femininity
probably because women have to care for
infants and so they tilt more towards
that end in any case
you have to calibrate that for each kid
and the only way to do that is to push
against each other right because how
else you going to do it there's no rule
and it's a dynamically changing
situation and you're too clueless and
blind on your own to do it properly but
maybe the two of you ironing out each
other's kinks in some sense in this
constant dance oriented as you might be
to the optimal development of your
children who you hypothetically love
maybe you can calibrate a moving Target
by pushing on each other back and forth
and maybe if you do that optimally then
you then it manifests
itself as something like play and you
know that happens because you take your
kids out hopefully this happens at least
sometimes you take your kids out to the
beach or something like that you have a
great day and what does that mean well
it means you got the balance right right
because there's some freedom and there's
some principles there's some rules it's
a game and everything
comes together in the right place at the
right time and you think that was a good
day and you think yeah every day could
could every day be like that and maybe
that's too much to ask for every day but
it's something to aim for and something
to try to Foster and it's something to
know consciously you know that that that
playful
engagement that's a marker of the
highest form of being
[Music]